2
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Message 1
Needs versus Wants
Message 2
Introduction to Banking
Message 3
Basics of Investment, Insurance and Pension
Message 4
Education Loan
Message 5
Financial Sector Regulators
3
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Message 1: Needs versus Wants
Look at the pictures below
NEED WANT NEED WANT
The first step in managing money successfully is being able to differentiate between NEEDS and WANTS. As
we can see from the photos above, NEEDS are a must-have, whereas WANTS are good to have. WANTS can
be postponed and acquired later. When we learn to identify our WANTS and inculcate the habit of postponing
those WANTS, we should be able to achieve most of our financial goals.
Budgeting
Budgeting is the art of balancing income and expenses to ensure that expenses are always less than income.
The surplus generated, if any, can be invested for future needs.
Borrowing
Friends Banks and Financial Institutions
Family Non-Banking Financial Institutions
Sources of
Borrowing
Income versus Expenses
ü û
4
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
BANKS
(Financial
institutions which
accept deposits
and provide
loans.)
Savings and
Current
Accounts
Provide facilities
like Cheque Book,
Funds Transfer,
Debit Card, and
Unified Payments
Facility.
Savings Account
• Can be opened by one person or jointly.
• Nominal interest is paid on an account balance.
• Some accounts may require maintenance of minimum balance.
Current Account
• Meant for business entities such as proprietorships, partnership firms, public and
private companies, trusts, association of persons, etc.
• No restrictions on the number and amount of deposits and withdrawals as long as the
account holder has funds in the bank.
• No interest is paid on the account balance.
Savings Accounts for Minors
• A savings account can be opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or
legally appointed guardian. Minors above the age of 10 years are allowed to open and
operate savings bank accounts independently, if they so desire.
• On reaching 18 years and of age, the age of majority in India, the erstwhile minor
should confirm the balance in his/her account. If the account is operated by their
natural/legal guardian, fresh operating instructions and a specimen signature of the
erstwhile minor should be obtained and kept on record for all operational purposes.
Deposits
Recurring Deposits
• A Recurring Deposit is popularly known as RD.
• A certain fixed amount is accepted every month for a specified period and the total
amount is repaid with interest at the end of the period. Deposits can be opened for
periods ranging from 6 months to 120 months.
• RDs are suitable for those who do not have a large amount of savings, but are ready to
save small amounts every month.
• No withdrawals are allowed. However, the bank may allow the account to be closed
before the maturity period. Any default in payment within the month attracts a small
penalty.
Fixed Deposits
• Fixed deposits or FDs are opened for a particular period, ranging from 7 days to 10
years.
• The rate of interest depends on the amount and the term of the deposit.
• Interest is usually paid as a lump sum at the end of the term. However, there are also
options to receive interest at periodic intervals.
• Deposits can be withdrawn prematurely provided the account holder has opted for it.
Loans
Personal Loan:
This type of loan can be used for any purpose. It is usually taken for emergencies like
medical expenses, marriage expenses, etc. The interest rate is higher on such loans.
Vehicle Loan:
This type of loan is provided for the purpose of buying a vehicle. The vehicle is hypothecated
to the bank and in case of default of the loan, the bank may take possession of the vehicle.
Home Loan:
Everyone dreams of having their own home, but buying a home requires a large amount
of money, which many people cannot afford. To fill this gap, banks provide home loans.
Education Loan:
Banks offer education loans to students who want to pursue higher studies. Once the
student completes his/her course and starts earning, he/she can repay the loan.
Agricultural Loans:
To cater to the needs of farmers, banks offer various types of loans. Farmers can buy seeds,
insecticides, tractors and other equipment needed for agriculture using this loan
Message 2: Introduction to Banking
5
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
An investment is like planting a tree. If monitored regularly and allowed sufficient time to grow, good returns
can be expected.
Traditionally, investors preferred gold, land and real estate as investment. Lately, however, the number of
investors choosing financial assets like stocks or mutual funds is on the rise.
Stocks and Mutual Funds
Shares/stocks reflect ownership interest in a company. Shares offer the investor shareholder rights wherein
the investor can participate in the annual general meeting and has the right to vote. These products earn
returns, depending on the profits made by the company. The returns may thus fluctuate depending upon
the profitability of the company’s business. These products offer a number of benefits but investors must
understand the company business well before investing. One can choose to invest in these instruments when
they have a longer investment horizon.
Message 3: Basics of Investment, Insurance and Pension
6
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Stocks of over 5,000 companies are available for investment through India’s two leading stock exchanges,
namely the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange. Stocks can be bought through brokers
registered with SEBI.
An investment is an allocation of resources into an asset or group of assets with the expectation of generating
future income or appreciation in value (e.g., investments in land, business enterprises, etc.). A large number
of people invest in the stock market through mutual funds or direct trading in stocks.
A mutual fund is a mechanism for pooling resources by issuing units to the investors and investing funds in
securities in accordance with objectives as disclosed in offer documents. Investments in securities are spread
across a wide cross-section of industries and sectors and thus the risk is reduced. Diversification reduces the
overall risk because all stocks may not move in the same direction or in the same proportion at the same
time. Mutual funds issue units to the investors in accordance with the quantum of money invested by them.
Investors of mutual funds are known as unit holders.
Mutual funds are normally started with a number of schemes with different investment objectives that are
launched from time to time. A mutual fund is required to be registered with the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) which regulates securities markets before it can collect funds from the public.
Growth/Equity oriented Scheme
The aim of growth funds is to provide capital appreciation over the medium and long term. Such schemes
normally invest a major part of their corpus in equities. They have comparatively high risks.
Income/Debt oriented Scheme
The aim of income funds is to provide regular and steady income to investors. Such schemes generally invest
in fixed income securities such as bonds, corporate debentures, government securities and money market
instruments. Such funds are less risky compared to equity schemes.
7
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Introduction to Insurance Introduction to Pension
Insurance is an arrangement through which one can
plan for the continuation of income when certain
events like disasters, illness, accident, death, or
old age may disrupt one’s ability to earn his/her
livelihood.
Universally, the insurance business is classified into
life insurance and general insurance. Life insurance
policies are termed as benefit policies of protection
and are normally considered to be a means of
protecting one’s family against the unforeseen
circumstance of death of the earning member.
Further, there are various types of life insurance
policies which help in accumulating savings, making
life insurance a common long-term investment.
Therefore, it is also seen as a savings and
investment option catering to an individual’s needs
at various stages of life. The general
insurance industry provides many benefits to
society by offering financial protection to individuals,
families, businessmen and industries, in the event of
unforeseen catastrophes, losses to their assets and
property.
It is important to know how much money one
will need for retirement as it can vary with one’s
individual circumstances. Life expectancy, inflation
and retirement age are some of the key factors
to be taken into consideration while calculating
retirement needs.
Inflation is the rising cost of consumer goods and
services. It affects one’s retirement needs in two
ways. First, the cost of goods increases which means
buying the same amount of goods becomes costlier.
Second, due to inflation, retirement savings also
lose value. Both these factors must be taken into
account when a retirement fund is created.
National Pension System (NPS)
The national pension system is a pension plan by
the Government of India to provide financial security
and stability during old age, when people don’t have
a regular source of income. It is open to all citizens
of the country between the ages of 18 and 60 on a
voluntary basis. One can subscribe to the NPS and
be able to save and invest systematically during the
duration of one’s working life. A minimum saving
of Rs. 500 per year is required to subscribe to the
scheme. When one retires, normally at age 60, one
will get a part of the money and the remaining can
be withdrawn on a monthly basis. Savings in NPS up
to a certain limit are also exempt from tax.
8
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
The popularity of an education loan option is increasing with each passing year. More students are exploring
the option of funding the cost of their higher education through education loans. Recognising the growing
need for education loans, a new portal has been launched to provide not only information on education
loans, but also a single-window application process to multiple banks.
Vidya Lakshmi (https://www.vidyalakshmi.co.in) is a web-based portal developed for the benefit of students
seeking educational loans. It is a single-window electronic platform providing all information about the
educational loan schemes of various banks. The Common Educational Loan Application form available on the
portal enables the student to apply to multiple banks. Students can apply, view, and track the status of their
education loan application anytime, anywhere, by accessing the portal.
More than one lakh students have already benefited from the portal and over 40 banks have registered to
provide education loans to students.
Important note on educational loans:
à As per the Model Education Loan Scheme 2015, formulated by the Indian Banks’ Association, the maximum
loan amount is Rs. 10 lakhs for higher education in India and Rs. 20 lakhs for study abroad.
à No margin/security is required to avail an education loan of up to Rs. 4 lakhs.
à Repayment of the loan will be in equated monthly installments (EMIs) for a period of 15 years for all
categories of loans.
à Repayment starts after completion of the course with a one-year moratorium period.
www.vidyalakshmi.co.in
Message 4: Education Loan
Step 1 Register
Step 2 Fill up single form
Step 3 Apply to multiple banks
9
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Message 5: Financial Sector Regulators
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the apex monetary authority and central bank of the country. It was
established on 1st April 1935, in accordance with the provision of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
The general direction and superintendence of the RBI is entrusted with the Central Board of Directors
headed by the Governor of the RBI. The central board is supported by four local boards at Delhi,
Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai.
Role of the RBI
• Issue of currency:
Along with the Government of India, the RBI is responsible for the design, production and overall
management of the nation’s currency, with the goal of ensuring an adequate supply of clean and
genuine notes.
• Banker to the government:
The RBI is the banker to the central government and also acts as the banker to state governments
that have entered into an agreement with it.
• Banker to banks:
As the banker to banks, the RBI focuses on the clearing and settlement of inter-bank obligations,
providing an efficient means of funds transfer for banks, maintaining banks’ accounts for the
purpose of statutory reserve requirements, and acting as lender of last resort.
• Conduct of monetary policy:
Price stability is a necessary precondition to sustainable growth. The primary objective of monetary
policy is to maintain price stability while keeping in mind the objective of growth.
• Developmental role:
The RBI aims to (a) ensure credit availability to the productive sectors of the economy, (b) establish
institutions designed to build the country’s financial infrastructure, (c) expand access to affordable
financial services and (d) promote financial literacy.
• Regulator and supervisor of the banks:
As the regulator and supervisor of the banking system, the RBI protects the interests of depositors,
ensures a framework for the orderly development and conduct of banking operations conducive
to customer interests, and maintains overall financial stability through preventive and corrective
measures.
• Regulator of the payment and settlement system:
RBI focuses on the development and functioning of a safe, secure, sound, efficient, accessible and
authorised payment system in the country.
•	 Maintains financial stability:
The RBI maintains financial stability through continuous monitoring of the financial system.
10
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI)
The Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI) was established in 1988
as an administrative body. It became
an autonomous statutory body on 12
April 1992 as per the provisions of the
SEBI Act, 1992. SEBI was established
with the prime mandate to protect
the interests of investors in the
securities market. It is also mandated
to promote the development and
regulation of the securities market.
The head office of SEBI is located in
Mumbai.
Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of
India (IRDAI)
The Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of India (IRDAI)
is a statutory body which is mandated
to regulate and develop the insurance
sector in India. It was established as
per the provisions of the IRDAI Act,
1999. IRDAI’s head office is located in
Hyderabad.
Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority (PFRDA)
The Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority (PFRDA) was
established by the Government of India
on 23 August 2003. The government has,
through an executive order dated 10
October 2003, mandated the PFRDA to act
as a regulator for the pension sector. The
mandate of the PFRDA is development
and regulation of the pension sector in
India. It has been accorded statutory
status as per the provisions of the PFRDA
Act, 2013. Its head office is located in New
Delhi.
Other Financial
Sector Regulators
The financial system in India
is regulated by independent
regulators in the areas of
insurance, capital markets, and
pension funds.
Other Financial Regulators
11
FINANCIAL LITERACY for School Children
One of the recommendations of the Committee on Medium-term Path on Financial Inclusion
chaired by Shri.Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India was ‘A ‘one size
fits all’ approach for Financial education might be less than ideal as different target groups
need different kinds of financial education. As a result, the content needs to be customised
for different target groups’.
The Financial Inclusion and Development Department of the Reserve Bank of India has come
up with customised financial literacy content for five different target groups, namely farmers,
small entrepreneurs, school children, self-help groups (SHGs), and senior citizens. This book
is one among the series of five books on customised financial literacy content.
Disclaimer
This book is presented as reading and teaching material with the sincere purpose of making
the reader financially literate. It is not intended to influence the reader into making a decision
in relation to any particular financial product/s or service/s.
Copyright
First Edition – April 2018
Reproduction is permitted provided the source is acknowledged.
Written and published by
Financial Inclusion & Development Department
Reserve Bank of India
10th floor, Central Office Building
Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg
Fort
Mumbai
Acknowledgements
Design: Kaushik Ramachandran
TARGET-SPECIFIC FINANCIAL LITERACY MATERIAL
Financial Inclusion and Development Department
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
10th Floor, Central Office
Mumbai 400001, INDIA